The woman was the heart of it. Not the Lady Selyse, the other one. The
red woman, the servants had named her, afraid to speak her name. “I will
speak her name,” Cressen told his stone hellhound. “Melisandre. Her.”
Melisandre of Asshai, sorceress, shadowbinder, and priestess to R’hllor,
the Lord of Light, the Heart of Fire, the God of Flame and Shadow.
Melisandre, whose madness must not be allowed to spread beyond
Dragonstone.
His chambers seemed dim and gloomy after the brightness of the
morning. With fumbling hands, the old man lit a candle and carried it to
the workroom beneath the rookery stair, where his ointments, potions,
and medicines stood neatly on their shelves. On the bottom shelf behind
a row of salves in squat clay jars he found a vial of indigo glass, no
larger than his little finger. It rattled when he shook it. Cressen blew
away a layer of dust and carried it back to his table. Collapsing into his
chair, he pulled the stopper and spilled out the vial’s contents. A dozen
crystals, no larger than seeds, rattled across the parchment he’d been
reading. They shone like jewels in the candlelight, so purple that the
maester found himself thinking that he had never truly seen the color
before.
The chain around his throat felt very heavy. He touched one of the
crystals lightly with the tip of his little finger. Such a small thing to hold
the power of life and death. It was made from a certain plant that grew
only on the islands of the Jade Sea, half a world away. The leaves had to
be aged, and soaked in a wash of limes and sugar water and certain rare
spices from the Summer Isles. Afterward they could be discarded, but
the potion must be thickened with ash and allowed to crystallize. The
process was slow and difficult, the necessaries costly and hard to
acquire. The alchemists of Lys knew the way of it, though, and the
Faceless Men of Braavos … and the maesters of his order as well,
though it was not something talked about beyond the walls of the
Citadel. All the world knew that a maester forged his silver link when he
learned the art of healing—but the world preferred to forget that men
who knew how to heal also knew how to kill.
Cressen no longer recalled the name the Asshai’i gave the leaf, or the
Lysene poisoners the crystal. In the Citadel, it was simply called the
strangler. Dissolved in wine, it would make the muscles of a man’s throat
clench tighter than any fist, shutting off his windpipe. They said a
victim’s face turned as purple as the little crystal seed from which his
death was grown, but so too did a man choking on a morsel of food.
And this very night Lord Stannis would feast his bannermen, his lady
wife … and the red woman, Melisandre of Asshai.
I must rest, Maester Cressen told himself. I must have all my strength
come dark. My hands must not shake, nor my courage flag. It is a
dreadful thing I do, yet it must be done. If there are gods, surely they will
forgive me. He had slept so poorly of late. A nap would refresh him for
the ordeal ahead. Wearily, he tottered off to his bed. Yet when he closed
his eyes, he could still see the light of the comet, red and fiery and
vividly alive amidst the darkness of his dreams. Perhaps it is my comet,
he thought drowsily at the last, just before sleep took him. An omen of
blood, foretelling murder … yes …
When he woke it was full dark, his bedchamber was black, and every
joint in his body ached. Cressen pushed himself up, his head throbbing.
Clutching for his cane, he rose unsteady to his feet. So late, he thought.
They did not summon me. He was always summoned for feasts, seated
near the salt, close to Lord Stannis. His lord’s face swam up before him,
not the man he was but the boy he had been, standing cold in the
shadows while the sun shone on his elder brother. Whatever he did,
Robert had done first, and better. Poor boy … he must hurry, for his sake.
The maester found the crystals where he had left them, and scooped
them off the parchment. Cressen owned no hollow rings, such as the
poisoners of Lys were said to favor, but a myriad of pockets great and
small were sewn inside the loose sleeves of his robe. He secreted the
strangler seeds in one of them, threw open his door, and called, “Pylos?
Where are you?” When he heard no reply, he called again, louder.
“Pylos, I need help.” Still there came no answer. That was queer; the
young maester had his cell only a half turn down the stair, within easy
earshot.
In the end, Cressen had to shout for the servants. “Make haste,” he told
them. “I have slept too long. They will be feasting by
now … drinking … I should have been woken.” What had happened to
Maester Pylos? Truly, he did not understand.
Again he had to cross the long gallery. A night wind whispered through
the great windows, sharp with the smell of the sea. Torches flickered
along the walls of Dragonstone, and in the camp beyond, he could see
hundreds of cookfires burning, as if a field of stars had fallen to the
earth. Above, the comet blazed red and malevolent. I am too old and
wise to fear such things, the maester told himself.
The doors to the Great Hall were set in the mouth of a stone dragon.
He told the servants to leave him outside. It would be better to enter
alone; he must not appear feeble. Leaning heavily on his cane, Cressen
climbed the last few steps and hobbled beneath the gateway teeth. A pair
of guardsmen opened the heavy red doors before him, unleashing a
sudden blast of noise and light. Cressen stepped down into the dragon’s
maw.
Over the clatter of knife and plate and the low mutter of table talk, he
heard Patchface singing, “… dance, my lord, dance my lord,” to the
accompaniment of jangling cowbells. The same dreadful song he’d sung
this morning. “The shadows come to stay, my lord, stay my lord, stay my
lord.” The lower tables were crowded with knights, archers, and
sellsword captains, tearing apart loaves of black bread to soak in their
fish stew. Here there was no loud laughter, no raucous shouting such as
marred the dignity of other men’s feasts; Lord Stannis did not permit
such.
Cressen made his way toward the raised platform where the lords sat
with the king. He had to step wide around Patchface. Dancing, his bells
ringing, the fool neither saw nor heard his approach. As he hopped from
one leg to the other, Patchface lurched into Cressen, knocking his cane
out from under him. They went crashing down together amidst the rushes
in a tangle of arms and legs, while a sudden gale of laughter went up
around them. No doubt it was a comical sight.
Patchface sprawled half on top of him, motley fool’s face pressed close
to his own. He had lost his tin helm with its antlers and bells. “Under the
sea, you fall up,” he declared. “I know, I know, oh, oh, oh.” Giggling, the
fool rolled off, bounded to his feet, and did a little dance.
Trying to make the best of it, the maester smiled feebly and struggled
to rise, but his hip was in such pain that for a moment he was half afraid
that he had broken it all over again. He felt strong hands grasp him under
the arms and lift him back to his feet. “Thank you, ser,” he murmured,
turning to see which knight had come to his aid …
“Maester,” said Lady Melisandre, her deep voice flavored with the
music of the Jade Sea. “You ought take more care.” As ever, she wore
red head to heel, a long loose gown of flowing silk as bright as fire, with
dagged sleeves and deep slashes in the bodice that showed glimpses of a
darker bloodred fabric beneath. Around her throat was a red gold choker
tighter than any maester’s chain, ornamented with a single great ruby.
Her hair was not the orange or strawberry color of common red-haired
men, but a deep burnished copper that shone in the light of the torches.
Even her eyes were red … but her skin was smooth and white,
unblemished, pale as cream. Slender she was, graceful, taller than most
knights, with full breasts and narrow waist and a heart-shaped face.
Men’s eyes that once found her did not quickly look away, not even a
maester’s eyes. Many called her beautiful. She was not beautiful. She
was red, and terrible, and red.
“I … thank you, my lady.”
“A man your age must look to where he steps,” Melisandre said
courteously. “The night is dark and full of terrors.”
He knew the phrase, some prayer of her faith. It makes no matter, I
have a faith of my own. “Only children fear the dark,” he told her. Yet
even as he said the words, he heard Patchface take up his song again.
“The shadows come to dance, my lord, dance my lord, dance my lord.”
“Now here is a riddle,” Melisandre said. “A clever fool and a foolish
wise man.” Bending, she picked up Patchface’s helm from where it had
fallen and set it on Cressen’s head. The cowbells rang softly as the tin
bucket slid down over his ears. “A crown to match your chain, Lord
Maester,” she announced. All around them, men were laughing.
Cressen pressed his lips together and fought to still his rage. She
thought he was feeble and helpless, but she would learn otherwise before
the night was done. Old he might be, yet he was still a maester of the
Citadel. “I need no crown but truth,” he told her, removing the fool’s
helm from his head.
“There are truths in this world that are not taught at Oldtown.”
Melisandre turned from him in a swirl of red silk and made her way back
to the high table, where King Stannis and his queen were seated. Cressen
handed the antlered tin bucket back to Patchface, and made to follow.
Maester Pylos sat in his place.
The old man could only stop and stare. “Maester Pylos,” he said at last.
“You … you did not wake me.”
“His Grace commanded me to let you rest.” Pylos had at least the grace
to blush. “He told me you were not needed here.”
Cressen looked over the knights and captains and lords sitting silent.
Lord Celtigar, aged and sour, wore a mantle patterned with red crabs
picked out in garnets. Handsome Lord Velaryon chose sea-green silk, the
white gold seahorse at his throat matching his long fair hair. Lord Bar
Emmon, that plump boy of fourteen, was swathed in purple velvet
trimmed with white seal, Ser Axell Florent remained homely even in
russet and fox fur, pious Lord Sunglass wore moonstones at throat and
wrist and finger, and the Lysene captain Salladhor Saan was a sunburst
of scarlet satin, gold, and jewels. Only Ser Davos dressed simply, in
brown doublet and green wool mantle, and only Ser Davos met his gaze,
with pity in his eyes.
“You are too ill and too confused to be of use to me, old man.” It
sounded so like Lord Stannis’s voice, but it could not be, it could not.
“Pylos will counsel me henceforth. Already he works with the ravens,
since you can no longer climb to the rookery. I will not have you kill
yourself in my service.”
Maester Cressen blinked. Stannis, my lord, my sad sullen boy, son I
never had, you must not do this, don’t you know how I have cared for
you, lived for you, loved you despite all? Yes, loved you, better than
Robert even, or Renly, for you were the one unloved, the one who needed
me most. Yet all he said was, “As you command, my lord, but … but I
am hungry. Might not I have a place at your table?” At your side, I
belong at your side …
Ser Davos rose from the bench. “I should be honored if the maester
would sit here beside me, Your Grace.”
“As you will.” Lord Stannis turned away to say something to
Melisandre, who had seated herself at his right hand, in the place of high
honor. Lady Selyse was on his left, flashing a smile as bright and brittle
as her jewels.
Too far, Cressen thought dully, looking at where Ser Davos was seated.
Half of the lords bannermen were between the smuggler and the high
table. I must be closer to her if I am to get the strangler into her cup, yet
how?
Patchface was capering about as the maester made his slow way
around the table to Davos Seaworth. “Here we eat fish,” the fool
declared happily, waving a cod about like a scepter. “Under the sea, the
fish eat us. I know, I know, oh, oh, oh.”
Ser Davos moved aside to make room on the bench. “We all should be
in motley tonight,” he said gloomily as Cressen seated himself, “for this
is fool’s business we’re about. The red woman has seen victory in her
flames, so Stannis means to press his claim, no matter what the numbers.
Before she’s done we’re all like to see what Patchface saw, I fear—the
bottom of the sea.”
Cressen slid his hands up into his sleeves as if for warmth. His fingers
found the hard lumps the crystals made in the wool. “Lord Stannis.”
Stannis turned from the red woman, but it was Lady Selyse who
replied. “King Stannis. You forget yourself, Maester.”
“He is old, his mind wanders,” the king told her gruffly. “What is it,
Cressen? Speak your mind.”
“As you intend to sail, it is vital that you make common cause with
Lord Stark and Lady Arryn …”
“I make common cause with no one,” Stannis Baratheon said.
“No more than light makes common cause with darkness.” Lady
Selyse took his hand.
Stannis nodded. “The Starks seek to steal half my kingdom, even as the
Lannisters have stolen my throne and my own sweet brother the swords
and service and strongholds that are mine by rights. They are all
usurpers, and they are all my enemies.”
I have lost him, Cressen thought, despairing. If only he could somehow
approach Melisandre unseen … he needed but an instant’s access to her
cup. “You are the rightful heir to your brother Robert, the true Lord of
the Seven Kingdoms, and King of the Andals, the Rhoynar, and the First
Men,” he said desperately, “but even so, you cannot hope to triumph
without allies.”
“He has an ally,” Lady Selyse said. “R’hllor, the Lord of Light, the
Heart of Fire, the God of Flame and Shadow.”
“Gods make uncertain allies at best,” the old man insisted, “and that
one has no power here.”
“You think not?” The ruby at Melisandre’s throat caught the light as
she turned her head, and for an instant it seemed to glow bright as the
comet. “If you will speak such folly, Maester, you ought to wear your
crown again.”
“Yes,” Lady Selyse agreed. “Patches’s helm. It suits you well, old man.
Put it on again, I command you.”
“Under the sea, no one wears hats,” Patchface said. “I know, I know,
oh, oh, oh.”
Lord Stannis’s eyes were shadowed beneath his heavy brow, his mouth
tight as his jaw worked silently. He always ground his teeth when he was
angry. “Fool,” he growled at last, “my lady wife commands. Give
Cressen your helm.”
No, the old maester thought, this is not you, not your way, you were
always just, always hard yet never cruel, never, you did not understand
mockery, no more than you understood laughter.
Patchface danced closer, his cowbells ringing, clang-a-lang, ding-ding,
clink-clank-clink-clank. The maester sat silent while the fool set the
antlered bucket on his brow. Cressen bowed his head beneath the weight.
His bells clanged. “Perhaps he ought sing his counsel henceforth,” Lady
Selyse said.
“You go too far, woman,” Lord Stannis said. “He is an old man, and
he’s served me well.”
And I will serve you to the last, my sweet lord, my poor lonely son,
Cressen thought, for suddenly he saw the way. Ser Davos’s cup was
before him, still half-full of sour red. He found a hard flake of crystal in
his sleeve, held it tight between thumb and forefinger as he reached for
the cup. Smooth motions, deft, I must not fumble now, he prayed, and the
gods were kind. In the blink of an eye, his fingers were empty. His hands
had not been so steady for years, nor half so fluid. Davos saw, but no one
else, he was certain. Cup in hand, he rose to his feet. “Mayhaps I have
been a fool. Lady Melisandre, will you share a cup of wine with me? A
cup in honor of your god, your Lord of Light? A cup to toast his power?”
The red woman studied him. “If you wish.”
He could feel them all watching him. Davos clutched at him as he left
the bench, catching his sleeve with the fingers that Lord Stannis had
shortened. “What are you doing?” he whispered.
“A thing that must be done,” Maester Cressen answered, “for the sake
of the realm, and the soul of my lord.” He shook off Davos’s hand,
spilling a drop of wine on the rushes.
She met him beneath the high table with every man’s eyes upon them.
But Cressen saw only her. Red silk, red eyes, the ruby red at her throat,
red lips curled in a faint smile as she put her hand atop his own, around
the cup. Her skin felt hot, feverish. “It is not too late to spill the wine,
Maester.”
“No,” he whispered hoarsely. “No.”
“As you will.” Melisandre of Asshai took the cup from his hands and
drank long and deep. There was only half a swallow of wine remaining
when she offered it back to him. “And now you.”
His hands were shaking, but he made himself be strong. A maester of
the Citadel must not be afraid. The wine was sour on his tongue. He let
the empty cup drop from his fingers to shatter on the floor. “He does
have power here, my lord,” the woman said. “And fire cleanses.” At her
throat, the ruby shimmered redly.
Cressen tried to reply, but his words caught in his throat. His cough
became a terrible thin whistle as he strained to suck in air. Iron fingers
tightened round his neck. As he sank to his knees, still he shook his head,
denying her, denying her power, denying her magic, denying her god.
And the cowbells peeled in his antlers, singing fool, fool, fool while the
red woman looked down on him in pity, the candle flames dancing in her
red red eyes.